1. Programming as a way of thinking
The first goal of this book is to teach you how to program in Python. But learning to program means learning a new way to think, so the second goal of this book is to help you think like a computer scientist. This way of thinking combines some of the best features of mathematics, engineering, and natural science. Like mathematicians, computer scientists use formal languages to denote ideas – specifically computations. Like engineers, they design things, assembling components into systems and evaluating trade-offs among alternatives. Like scientists, they observe the behavior of complex systems, form hypotheses, and test predictions.

We will start with the most basic elements of programming and work our way up. In this chapter, we'll see how Python represents numbers, letters, and words. And you'll learn to perform arithmetic operations.

You will also start to learn the vocabulary of programming, including terms like operator, expression, value, and type. This vocabulary is important – you will need it to understand the rest of the book, to communicate with other programmers, and to use and understand virtual assistants.

1.6. Formal and natural languages
Natural languages are the languages people speak, like English, Spanish, and French. They were not designed by people; they evolved naturally.

Formal languages are languages that are designed by people for specific applications. For example, the notation that mathematicians use is a formal language that is particularly good at denoting relationships among numbers and symbols. Similarly, programming languages are formal languages that have been designed to express computations.

Although formal and natural languages have some features in common there are important differences:

Ambiguity: Natural languages are full of ambiguity, which people deal with by using contextual clues and other information. Formal languages are designed to be nearly or completely unambiguous, which means that any program has exactly one meaning, regardless of context.

Redundancy: In order to make up for ambiguity and reduce misunderstandings, natural languages use redundancy. As a result, they are often verbose. Formal languages are less redundant and more concise.

Literalness: Natural languages are full of idiom and metaphor. Formal languages mean exactly what they say.

Because we all grow up speaking natural languages, it is sometimes hard to adjust to formal languages. Formal languages are more dense than natural languages, so it takes longer to read them. Also, the structure is important, so it is not always best to read from top to bottom, left to right. Finally, the details matter. Small errors in spelling and punctuation, which you can get away with in natural languages, can make a big difference in a formal language.

1.7. Debugging
Programmers make mistakes. For whimsical reasons, programming errors are called bugs and the process of tracking them down is called debugging.

Programming, and especially debugging, sometimes brings out strong emotions. If you are struggling with a difficult bug, you might feel angry, sad, or embarrassed.

Preparing for these reactions might help you deal with them. One approach is to think of the computer as an employee with certain strengths, like speed and precision, and particular weaknesses, like lack of empathy and inability to grasp the big picture.

Your job is to be a good manager: find ways to take advantage of the strengths and mitigate the weaknesses. And find ways to use your emotions to engage with the problem, without letting your reactions interfere with your ability to work effectively.

Learning to debug can be frustrating, but it is a valuable skill that is useful for many activities beyond programming. At the end of each chapter there is a section, like this one, with my suggestions for debugging. I hope they help!

12.10. Debugging
At this point we are writing more substantial programs, and you might find that you are spending more time debugging. If you are stuck on a difficult bug, here are a few things to try:

Reading: Examine your code, read it back to yourself, and check that it says what you meant to say.

Running: Experiment by making changes and running different versions. Often if you display the right thing at the right place in the program, the problem becomes obvious, but sometimes you have to build scaffolding.

Ruminating: Take some time to think! What kind of error is it: syntax, runtime, or semantic? What information can you get from the error messages, or from the output of the program? What kind of error could cause the problem you're seeing? What did you change last, before the problem appeared?

Rubberducking: If you explain the problem to someone else, you sometimes find the answer before you finish asking the question. Often you don't need the other person; you could just talk to a rubber duck. And that's the origin of the well-known strategy called rubber duck debugging. I am not making this up – see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rubber_duck_debugging.

Retreating: At some point, the best thing to do is back up – undoing recent changes – until you get to a program that works. Then you can start rebuilding.

Resting: If you give your brain a break, sometime it will find the problem for you.

Beginning programmers sometimes get stuck on one of these activities and forget the others. Each activity comes with its own failure mode.

For example, reading your code works if the problem is a typographical error, but not if the problem is a conceptual misunderstanding. If you don't understand what your program does, you can read it 100 times and never see the error, because the error is in your head.

Running experiments can work, especially if you run small, simple tests. But if you run experiments without thinking or reading your code, it can take a long time to figure out what's happening.

You have to take time to think. Debugging is like an experimental science. You should have at least one hypothesis about what the problem is. If there are two or more possibilities, try to think of a test that would eliminate one of them.

But even the best debugging techniques will fail if there are too many errors, or if the code you are trying to fix is too big and complicated. Sometimes the best option is to retreat, simplifying the program until you get back to something that works.

Beginning programmers are often reluctant to retreat because they can't stand to delete a line of code (even if it's wrong). If it makes you feel better, copy your program into another file before you start stripping it down. Then you can copy the pieces back one at a time.

Finding a hard bug requires reading, running, ruminating, retreating, and sometimes resting. If you get stuck on one of these activities, try the others.
